Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews. Norman Spinrad has strong opinions about
science fiction and its place in today's world. As a noted author who helped
bring the science fiction new wave to this country, and as two-time president of
the Science Fiction Writers of America, Spinrad's ideas should be heard. One
thing he feels strongly about is that science fiction has not been treated
fairly by book reviewers. As a category, you know, it is treated very unfairly
and very cavalierly by the powers that be, which is mainly the New York Times
Book Review and the New York Review of Books and the so-called New York Literary
Establishment, which really does have a very heavy effect on the way books are
published. These people, for instance, came down on the American Book Awards,
succeeded in getting science fiction knocked out of the American Book Awards. A
real small clique of people in New York City who felt that it was really bad to
have these awards given to things like science fiction, that it was bad to take
it away from a small jury which they could control and have thousands of people
voting for. A very elitist, social fascist bunch of people who I have absolutely
no use for. And I'm sure they have no use for me. As president of the Science
Fiction Writers of America, Spinrad has worked for some changes in the field.
One thing that I'm already halfway through getting done is to internationalize
it, is to have an overseas region with an overseas director on our board of
directors. Because science fiction writing and publishing really is an
international community. American writers sell their work all over the world.
English writers sell their work here. Foreign language writers have different
problems. And we're all dealing with the same publishers. It certainly is an
international literature. And it's a spirit of the future and the spirit of
internationalism and so forth. I felt it should be an international
organization. That's one thing. Another thing that I want to do and halfway to
doing is upgrading the Nebula Awards. We have moved it out of the Warwick Hotel.
We're moving it into a much bigger room in the world often trying to make it
into a more significant event than it has been. Again, orienting it towards the
world at large rather than towards the little in-group. Spinrad has always been
concerned with the image science fiction has with the general public. He thinks
general readers should be made more aware of science fiction's unique
possibilities and its genuine value. We asked him if science fiction movies have
a positive or negative influence on the public's image of the field. Oh, I don't
know. I don't think they... Not really. I mean, the image of science fiction in
that respect has been very bad anyway. I don't think the movies really add to
the image. But I don't think they detract from it either. If there are some
better, more sophisticated movies, they might help. But as it is, it's just kind
of neutral publicity. People are more aware that it exists. I think it's
positive. And it will prove to be positive in the long range. Because a lot of
people are being introduced to the imagery of science fiction with which they
were unfamiliar through these movies. And if you look at the evolution in the
movies, you find that in the earlier science fiction movies, if you're going
into space or whatever it is, you have to spend like half an hour setting the
thing. This is a spaceship. It takes off on the Earth. People float around it.
You know, you have to familiarize the audience with all this unfamiliar imagery.
Now they can just start a movie, bang, right off, in a galaxy far away. Boom.
Here's a spaceship in the Stromo. Pow. In other words, the first half hour of
the conventional old-time science fiction movie is gone because people are now
familiar with this imagery. And I think these movies have brought a lot of new
people into familiarity with these images. They made these images part of the
popular culture. These movies have been mainly aimed at kids and adolescents.
And years from now, assuming that these people will ever read anything, they
will be ready to read science fiction of a more serious kind, assuming they're
ready to read literature of a more serious kind at all, because they'll be
familiar with the material, familiar with the literature. It won't seem strange
and weird to them because they will have grown up with it. That's why I think
magazines, even magazines like Starlogs, in that sense, will have a long-term
positive impact. More with Norman Spinrad on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. Norman Spinrad's best-known novel may be Bug
Jack Barron, a book which has stirred controversy in both England and America. It
was published in this country in 1969, and it's a different sort of science
fiction novel. It's a good example of new-wave science fiction. Character and
style are important, and it deals with social issues such as racism, the
establishment, drugs, the power of the media, and radical protests. There is
also a good deal of sex and violence in the book, and the language is highly
colored. But Spinrad thinks the plot of the book conforms to traditional science
fiction formulas. Actually, what I was trying to do in a way, the book has a
very traditional plot. As far as I was concerned, it has a positive hero, it has
a negative villain. The hero wins, the villain loses, all that stuff that is
considered the traditional way of plotting a book. And yet it's written in a
different kind of way. It kind of takes that superficial kind of plot and treats
it in a realistic manner. The protagonist, Jack Barron, is a powerfully
influential television star who has a talk show watched by 100 million people.
He uses the show as a battlefield to oppose corrupt elements of society. Spinrad
comments on Barron's use of power. The book is about power.
It's about power itself is neutral as far as I'm concerned. It's what people do
with it that counts. Barron is a guy who likes power. He keeps referring to it
as a drug and knows that he can become addicted to it. And for that reason, has
decided to stay away from it. Then he gets drawn back into playing with power
because he comes to the conclusion that it's better for somebody who feels that
way about power to be wielding it than people who don't have any self
-consciousness about the dangers of wielding power. So in that sense, it's a
comment on the power of the media, but it's also a comment on the morality of
power, on the paradox of power, which is that if you leave power to be wielded
by people who do not see the dangers, the personal dangers, the psychological
dangers of being involved with it, then you end up with people like Benedict
Howard, Ronald Reagan, and Richard Nixon who do not have self-consciousness
about the personal dangers, the moral dangers of chasing after power, whereas
somebody like Barron, who is certainly an imperfect person, as all people are,
at least his saving grace, if he has one, is that he is well aware of the
personal dangers of being involved in a quest for power. When Spinrad tried to
get the novel published in this country, he was unsuccessful, so he tried in
Britain. But there was an outcry in Parliament against the book. He relates the
story for us. That novel had a lot of trouble. It was written under contract to
Doubleday, who then rejected it. You have to remember the political climate of
the era. They didn't reject it. They said, we'll publish it if you cut out all
the sex, all the swear words, and all the politics, which was the whole book. So
it took a long time to resell that book here. In the meantime, I took it to
Milford, to a Milford conference, and Mike Moorcock was there. He read it, and
he liked it, and he serialized it in New World. So his first publication was
actually in England, in a magazine. Now, halfway through the serialization, I
forget exactly which part, part three, part four, W.H. Smith, which was the
biggest distribute, still is the biggest distributor in England, refused to
distribute the magazine because of the book in it. Now, at that time, New World
had an Arts Council grant. The Arts Council was an organ of the British
government. Now, the Arts Council supported the magazine against Smith publicly.
And so the flap in Parliament arose when certain right-wing members of
Parliament were aghast that an organ of the British government, the Arts
Council, was defending this kind of stuff. And that's how it became a
parliamentary issue. Bug Jack Barron is being made into a movie with a screenplay
by Harlan Ellison and direction by radical filmmaker Costa-Gavras. It should be
interesting. More with Norman Spinrad next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. Norman Spinrad's 1979 science fiction novel,
A World Between, signaled a change in his fiction. Spinrad's early work usually
contain either subtle or overt criticism of various aspects of society. Bug Jack
Barron, The Men in the Jungle, and Agent of Chaos are good examples of this type.
A World Between is also a socially oriented novel, but there's a different
element in it. Spinrad explains. I would say in general that up until, I guess A
World Between, really, a lot of my stuff was kind of critical fiction, critical
of this, critical of existing societies, critical of various things that were
going on. A World Between is meant as a utopian novel, really, in any kind of
way, and it's a prescriptive kind of book. It's more of a, instead of presenting
critical images of other things, the idea is to create a more positive image of
a more positive kind of future. I think if you spend enough time criticizing
what exists, at some point, you'll have some kind of moral obligation to present
something more positive and replace what you find negative.
The setting for the novel is a fit one for a utopia. It takes place on the
planet Pacifica, a beautiful world of blue ocean and lush green islands that's
been colonized by humans. Inhabitants of Pacifica live private lives in their
isolated islands. There are no large urban centers to cause pollution,
overpopulation, or poverty. Even though they are physically isolated, the
Pacificans remain in close electronic contact with one another. They govern
themselves, in fact, with a tight media web that allows them to vote immediately
on any issue of importance. But into this idyllic world comes two opposed
political forces from Earth, bent on the ideological conquest of Pacifica. One
force is the Institute for Transcendental Science, a powerful organization whose
goal is galactic unity under their control. They are extreme, and Spinrad says
they have two basic flaws. One is the unexamined, subtle male chauvinist bias of
their culture. And the other one is the ultimate conviction that what they are
doing is the absolute most important thing in the universe, and that therefore
they are morally entitled to run over other people's cultures and desires.
The other force is the Femocrats, a militant women's liberation group that is
also an extreme. The struggle of these two groups for control of planets all
across the galaxy is called the Pink and Blue War. It's clearly a male-female
conflict, and so far every planet the two sides have approached has ended up on
one side or the other. But Pacifica is different. Spinrad's utopia is a stable
and intelligent one. The Pacificans reject both extremes and even change the
minds of a few of the combatants. We asked Spinrad about reactions to the book.
How did women, for instance, respond to the Femocratic women's livers? The
strange thing about the reaction to that book has been that a certain number of
men have reacted in a kind of male liberal guilt, male feminist kind of reaction
against that. For the most part, women have liked the book. Women have
identified with it more than men. And actually, I even got one or two good
reviews in feminist places. I think that's not quite what I expected, but that
seems to be the way it happened. I have not gotten heavy feminist flack from
that. A little bit, but not much. Not much, because I think women who are
involved in feminism or have been or know women who are can recognize a certain
aspect of the feminist movement in the Femocrats, whereas men who are trying to
show how liberated they are would not dream of admitting such a thing. A World
Between, a different sort of book for Norman Spinrad, and we'll have more on him
tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. Norman Spinrad's most recent novel, Songs
from the Stars, was published by Simon & Schuster in 1980. The book describes a
fragmented future society in a world devastated by nuclear war. This, of course,
is a typical Spinrad theme. But the novel also communicates the sense of wonder
characteristic of good science fiction when it describes the marvels of contact
with an alien civilization. Society is split in two factions in Songs from the
Stars. One faction is an Aquarian society which bans all technology, in fact,
anything having to do with science, since this was what was responsible for
almost destroying the Earth. And the other faction are the black scientists who
keep technology alive and maintain an illicit smuggling operation with the
Aquarian society. Spinrad talks about these opposed factions. It's a book
against duality. I mean, you have two fragmented societies. They're both...
both are kind of like half-societies. The Aquarian society there is a very nice
thing that works, except it really only works because it accepts something from
the black scientists which it doesn't want to admit that it's accepted. And the
black scientists are, again, another kind of absolutism which doesn't
sell... It's a kind of a... It's a book about... about higher unity, I guess. As
usual, with Spinrad, the book's conflict reflects current social conditions. You
know, it mirrors the present thing in our society where, on the one hand, you
have a great big space movement and people wanting to get into space and all the
old people and all that stuff. On the other hand, you have a real atavistic neo
-Luddite movement, an anti-nuclear movement which is really kind of willfully
ignorant of a lot of things. In a way, these are the two things that could bring
about the crash
as well as what would survive it. So I think it's basically a book about... The
grand philosophical attempt in that book is to try and bridge the gap between
science and reason and, you know, feeling, emotion, and mysticism. And to... You
know, to point to a higher unity between the two things and away from the false
dichotomies and false dualisms would seem to be really destroying Western
civilization, as a law stated. The protagonist in the book is a laid-back
Aquarian, Clear Blue Lou. Along with his girl and a scientist, he travels up to
a satellite circling the Earth. There, the three of them receive communication
from some incredibly advanced alien civilizations in another part of the galaxy.
With the knowledge sent by the helpful aliens, it seems the humans will solve
their own problems, unite, and start progressing toward the stars once more. We
asked Spinrad that if and when we contact an alien civilization is it likely
they will be helpful rather than hostile? As I said in the book, I do believe
that any civilization that's going to last a million years, it's going to be a
million years or whatever or even a hundred thousand years more advanced than us
that have been around that much longer and that much more advanced science. If
it's going to survive to that length of its own history, it's got to solve it,
you know, it's got to be by that time philosophically and emotionally pretty
together or long since it destroyed itself. I mean, we certainly will not
survive a million years of our own history if it continues as it has, you know,
in order that any civilization that survives a million years of its own history
has had to have gotten its political, psychological, and philosophical act
together. and I don't see why, you know, you know, and I do believe that if and
when we run into that kind of really advanced civilizations, that they will, if
not be directly actively helpful, certainly will be benign and will not be
interested in either eating us or conquering our planet or blowing us up or
anything like that. Songs from the Stars is a thoughtfully written book with a
theme, but it's also good, exciting science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. James P. Hogan's latest novel, Voyage from
Yesteryear, is a fascinating blend of computers, space exploration, and genetic
engineering. It's about a robot probe that discovers a habitable planet ten
light years from Earth, but it's different than the usual probe imagined by
science fiction authors. Right. This one is equipped to manufacture human
beings. Hogan explains. We read a lot of stories about starships that go on long
voyages that take maybe centuries, and inevitably they've got frozen bodies or
bodies in suspended animation or something like that. But when you think about
it, it seems rather an inefficient way to say, you know, if they're not doing
anything, the machines can fly the ship, the computers can get it there. The
people aren't doing anything about it except, you know, just lying there
freezing. So, you know, why not let the machines fly the ship and make the
people when you get there? But if we look at the progress made in molecular
biology and genetic engineering in the last couple of decades, we already
manufacture quite complex organic molecules to specifications, such as drugs and
certainly antithetics. If we just extrapolate that a little further, who's to
say you couldn't make a complete set of human DNA? In other words, instead of
sending bodies and all the support equipment to freeze them and taking up all
the space, why not just store
all the genetic information necessary to make people electronically in the
computers and create them when you have found a planet that the instruments say
they could survive on? So the computers make a race of humans, raise them, and
place them on the planet. It sounds a bit mechanical, a little inhuman perhaps,
but Hogan thinks it could work out beautifully. So here is the interesting
possibility of a race that evolves from a first generation of embryos that were
created and nurtured and raised by computers and robots, a machine-raised race.
And when you think about it, the relationship between the children and the
machines does not really have to be a cold and sinister one at all. It could be
quite a charming and amusing one. The interesting thoughts that the book starts
to play with is, here is a race of kids that are being raised by some
very rational, direct, down-to-earth entities who don't double-talk or deceive
or have all these layers of human game-playing that we have to contend with. And
they're being raised completely without
any exposure to the conditioning of conditioned adults with their prejudices and
hatreds and taboos and a lot of the other nonsenses that make life so
complicated in our society. As you might expect, these machine-raised humans are
eventually contacted by humans from Earth. Let's imagine that a mission from
Earth eventually shows up.
Virtually, you know, a big mission. This is usually a 20-year voyage, maybe. So
we're talking about a spaceship that maybe houses 20,000 people, virtually a
space colony with engines, with its government, its military, its church
organisations, its commercial institutions, the whole of society in miniature
with its time-proved mechanisms for controlling and subordinating a population,
which traditionally a ruling elite through history has imposed itself by
restricting the flow of wealth and by offering protection either from real or
imagined threats. And so what happens when a race of machine-raised people
eventually collides with a race of people-raised people? And that's really what
the story's all about. Voyage from Yesteryear will be out in paperback at the
end of July. Next week we'll have a series of shows on the works of James B.
Hogan.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.